South African regional airline Airlink now has representation in markets in North America and Asia. This follows its appointment of Germany-based international aviation, tourism, hospitality, food and beverage brands communications company AVIAREPS as its General Sales Agent (GSA) in these markets. “North America is a significant source market, not just for Airlink, but for businesses, entrepreneurs, and leisure travellers,” explained Airlink executive manager: sales & marketing Carla da Silva. “Economic activity between South Africa and North America is increasing, including tourism, trade and commerce. Similarly, with Asia reopening, we expect a surge in demand as it re-emerges as another vital market for Airlink and the businesses and communities we serve.” “We feel honoured about the appointment as GSA for Airlink in North America and Asia and are thrilled to see our partnership with Airlink grow,” highlighted AVIAREPS COO: aviation Marcelo Kaiser. “Airlink is a dynamic carrier with a world-class product and offering. By extending our representation of Airlink, we will fly Airlink’s brand and boost its sales across all the major travel trade channels and platforms where AVIAREPS has a broad footprint in Asia, North America, Europe, East Africa and Latin America.” As a result of this latest appointment, AVIAREPS now represents Airlink in 39 markets across all five inhabited continents. The partnership between the two companies allows the airline to optimise its global footprint, stimulate travel and tourism to South and Southern Africa from around the world, and increase its sales in overseas markets. “AVIAREPS will play an important role promoting Airlink, its reach, convenient schedule and connections, its service, and reliability – all key considerations for anyone wanting to explore and take advantage of the opportunities that exist on both sides of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans,” elucidated Da Silva. “This will also add mutual benefit and value to our firm,” pointed out Kaiser. “As a result, there is every incentive for us to work closely with Airlink and increase its penetration in these markets.”