Compressors, power tools, vacuum solutions and generators manufacturer Atlas Copco this year celebrates 150 years in existence as a global leader of industrial technology and engineering. The South African business, Atlas Copco Industrial South Africa, based in Jet Park, Boksburg, commemorated the event by hosting employees, customers, suppliers, distributors and other business partners for a flag hoisting ceremony, a panel discussion with various representatives from other companies and a keynote address by Swedish Ambassador to South Africa Hakan Juholt. He pointed out that, when Atlas Copco was established in Stockholm in 1973, Sweden was one of the poorest countries in Europe. However, then came the rise of globalisation and the second industrial revolution, which helped companies such as Atlas Copco grow bigger and support the economy, while attracting investors, creating jobs and launching new innovations. Sweden has since developed into one of the richest countries in the world, and Atlas Copco is one of the largest Swedish companies globally. Atlas Copco cites key drivers for its success as innovation, sustainability, values, ethics, employee wellbeing, safety, diversity and inclusion, customer experience and environmental responsibility. “As the home of industrial ideas, we are masters of adaptability, change and agility, driven by service,” noted Atlas Copco Industrial South Africa MD Wendy Buffa Pace. She adds that the company’s ability to successfully incorporate advanced technologies into its products enables Atlas Copco to offer customers high-end solutions with the purpose of empowering them to grow sustainably as well. Notably, Pace pointed out that the Atlas Copco Group is targeting 30% female representation in the company by 2030, while the South African business already encompasses 37% female representation, in what has traditionally been a male-dominated industry. Moreover, Atlas Copco is targeting a 46% reduction in carbon emissions by 2030 and is, to this end, enforcing a culture of maximum carbon impact shrinkage. Atlas Copco Industrial South Africa already operates in an energy- and water-efficient building and will soon switch its company vehicles to hybrid models. The company also ensures products reaching end-users are sustainable, by incorporating energy efficiency into research and development.