Plans by Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA) to redevelop the Point Precinct in the Port of Durban in support of the KwaZulu-Natal Port Master Plan have received much-needed impetus, the entity says in a statement. Included in this development is the expansion of the Point Automotive Terminal, which has exceeded its landside capacity, and the development of the Point Container Terminal to position the port as a competitive container hub port. The Point Precinct redevelopment is in line with Transnet’s core mandate of managing the cost of doing business, enabling economic growth, and security of supply through the provision of infrastructure that is fit for purpose as outlined in the National Ports Act (the Act). TNPA’s role and function, as outlined in the Act, includes the responsibility to control land use within ports by planning, providing, maintaining and improving port infrastructure, by periodically updating the port development framework plans for each port, and further ensuring that the infrastructure of ports is managed and maintained in a manner that ensures efficient, safe and orderly port operations. In discharging its function, TNPA enables and facilitates the development of trade and commerce in the interests of the national economy, KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Growth Strategy as well as that of eThekwini municipality. The redevelopment of the precinct will require various buildings and structures to be demolished to create the proposed automotive terminal capacities. Several of the buildings and structures are over 60 years old and, as prescribed by the National Heritage Resources Act and the KwaZulu-Natal Amafa and Research Institute (Amafa) Act, must submit a demolition application to Amafa that will be subject to a public process for comments, objections and support. The Ocean Terminal Building Complex Demolishing Application was submitted by TNPA to Amafa in November 2022, which was followed by a public process to solicit comments from interested parties in respect of the application for the demolition of buildings and structures in the Point Precinct. A public meeting, hosted by Amafa, sat on February 21 for the respondents to table their objections and comments and TNPA was afforded an opportunity to respond, prior to Amafa’s decision. Following Amafa’s decision to favourably consider TNPA’s application and grant permission for the demolition to take place, the port will begin with the plans set out for the demolition of the D/E, L, M, N Sheds, MHA Building, OTB, Durmarine Building, Schoeman's bridge, and spiral ramp. This will be preceded by an environmental-impact assessment process and conducted in a phased approach over a 12-month period. Demolition is expected to begin early in 2024. “The successful implementation of the Point Precinct’s redevelopment will have a significantly positive socioeconomic impact for not only the City of Durban, but also for the province of KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa as a whole. “We anticipate the creation of about 500 000 direct and indirect employment opportunities throughout the implementation of the Durban Port Masterplan developments, which will improve the lives and livelihoods of the economically disenfranchised people of South Africa. On the basis of six to eight members per family, the lives of three-million people will be positively impacted,” says Port of Durban port manager Mpumi Dweba.