Ten schools in underserved communities have been selected out of 51 nationally to participate in Phase 2 of electronic equipment multinational Samsung South Africa's Solve for Tomorrow school competition. Each school will present the prototype of their solution to a panel of judges at the conclusion and can win science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) equipment for their schools. The company is providing funding for prototypes, taking learners to a design thinking workshop and sponsoring every school with a Samsung tablet and data to help them do research. “The learners will tackle an emerging challenge and produce tangible innovations to help improve society with the help of assigned Samsung employees and mentors,” Samsung said. The first prize is R100 000 of STEM equipment, the second prize R50 000 and the third prize R30 000 of equipment. In addition to the main prizes, each of the learners in the top three teams will be rewarded with a Samsung device, the company said. The competition is carefully curated to encourage innovative thinking, creative problem-solving and teamwork to nurture social innovation ideas that can address various communities’ most pressing problems. Samsung South Africa has partnered with the State Information Technology Agency (SITA) to pilot the Solve for Tomorrow contest with 51 pre-selected schools nationally this year. The competition is aimed at giving grade 10 and 11 learners from underserved communities an opportunity to gain invaluable skills while solving some of the challenges within their communities through STEM. “The competition has been designed to increase interest and proficiency in STEM education. It is supported by ten Samsung employee mentors from various disciplines in the Samsung business who have a passion for and interest in STEM. These mentors act as a support structure to the learners,” said Samsung South Africa business operations, innovation and corporate affairs director Hlubi Shivanda. “This community- and youth-driven initiative is one of the ways in which we are encouraging digital transformation in South Africa and harnessing the power of technology and innovation to effect great positive change in the country. We are convinced that investment in South Africa through digital transformation will contribute positively towards sustainable future economic growth,” he added. Government believes the most effective and sustainable way to build an economy is to equip young people with the skills and know-how to drive it; thus, SITA's efforts are focused on strengthening the link between the skills that are developed and those needed in the workplace. This motivated it to be part of the initiative, said SITA corporate affairs head Tlali Tlali. Samsung shares government’s view that South Africa, now more than ever, needs to equip the youth to seize the opportunities that lie in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector. The company recognises that education and beneficiation are the cornerstones of the country’s future and are requirements for it to be a major player in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, emphasised Shivanda. “Samsung is spearheading large-scale ICT-driven initiatives aimed at enabling previously underserved societies, and introducing disruptive innovation that contributes to superior networks that reach remote areas. As Samsung, we recognise that investing in the country’s technological advancement is intrinsically linked to economic growth,” he said. “Our country has a history of inequality and we need to do something about it. This partnership seeks to redress the imbalances of the past, empower the youth and shape South Africa to be able to be counted among the top nations,” said Tlali. The ten selected schools are Mbilwi Secondary School and Moyaneng Secondary School, in Limpopo; Phendukani High School, Natal Adams College and Natal Umlazi Comprehensive Tech, in KwaZulu-Natal; Rebatlathuto High School and Lekgarietsi High School, in the Free State; Maphuthaditshaba Secondary School, in Mpumalanga; and Phomolong Secondary School and Buhle Bemfundo Secondary School, in Gauteng.