South Africa’s manufacturing production, on a seasonally adjusted basis, increased by 2% in November last year, compared with the preceding month. This followed month-on-month changes of -6.2% in October 2022 and 4.6% in September. On a year-on-year basis, manufacturing production decreased by 1.1% in November, compared with November 2021. The largest negative contributors were the food and beverages industry, contracting by 2.5% and contributing -0.6 of a percentage point; the wood and wood products, paper, publishing and printing industry, contracting by 4.5% and contributing -0.5 of a percentage point; and the petroleum, chemical products, rubber and plastic products industry, contracting by 2.5% and contributing -0.5 of a percentage point. The largest positive contributor to manufacturing production in November, on a year-on-year basis, was the motor vehicles, parts and accessories industry, growing output by 13.4% and contributing 1.3 percentage points. Seasonally adjusted manufacturing production increased by 2.4% in the three months ended November 30, compared with the preceding three months. Seven of the ten manufacturing divisions reported positive growth rates in the three months ended November, with the motor vehicles industry growing output at a rate of 20.6%, and contributing two percentage points, and food and beverages growing output by 2.2%, and contributing 0.5 of a percentage point. SALES Seasonally adjusted manufacturing sales increased by 3.4% in November 2022, compared with October 2022. This followed month-on-month changes of -4.9% in October and 4% in September. Seasonally adjusted manufacturing sales increased by 2.5% in the three months ended November 2022, compared with the prior three months. The largest positive contributor was the motor vehicles industry, growing sales by 14% and contributing 1.9 percentage points. The largest negative contribution was made by the basic iron and steel, nonferrous metal products, metal products and machinery division, having recorded a sales decline of 66% and contributing -1.5 percentage points to the headline figure.