The International Air Transport Association (IATA) has announced that it has finished its yearly revision of its manuals for operations, ground handling and cargo in the air transport sector. IATA is the global representative body for the airline industry. The updating of the manuals displayed, the association noted, the sector’s determination to further improve safety, adopt more sustainable operations, enhance cargo handling, and enhance the experience of airline passengers. “Aviation is a unique industry with its global footprint covering operations from mega-hubs, through regional airports to small and even remote airfields,” pointed out IATA senior VP for commercial products and services Frederic Leger. “Nevertheless, the same standards and procedures need to be applied across the globe, in order to maintain smooth operations and a high level of safety. The IATA manuals are the reference materials, accurately reflecting agreed global standards, which the industry abides by.” IATA, founded in 1945, has been publishing manuals on a very wide range of aviation topics for more than 60 years now. Its manuals are based on recommendations from those bodies which set the agreed international standards, such as the International Civil Aviation Organisation (an intergovernmental organisation, within the United Nations system). The annual manual revision process is carried out by a number of specialist industry working groups, designated Boards by IATA. Examples are the Dangerous Goods Board and the Live Animals and Perishables Board. These are composed of both IATA and outside experts. These boards also work with governments and industry stakeholders. In additional to the traditional printed format, more and more of the manuals are being made available in digital format. The 2023 editions of the manuals contain more than 350 updates. Thus, the Dangerous Goods manual now has an increased focus on the safe transport of lithium batteries, while the Live Animals Regulations manual has been revised to deal with the increased numbers of domestic pets being transported by air, to ensure the welfare of the animals even during travel disruptions and to manage the air transport of pets in “extraordinary circumstances”. Likewise, the IATA Ground Operations Manual has been updated to improve the travel experiences of passengers with disabilities, including improved transport of their mobility aids. And the Standard Procedures for Preloading Advanced Cargo Information manual has been revised to accommodate the European Union’s new Import Control System, as well as similar systems soon to be introduced by Canada, the United Arab Emirates, the UK, and the US, among others, intended to increase security; failure by shippers, forwarders and airlines to comply with these systems could result in fines being imposed and shipments being delayed.