Germany-based water management product developer, manufacturer and marketer firm Graf Group has acquired a majority stake in Luxembourg-based rotational moulding and wastewater treatment specialist RBB Group. Graf, a second-generation family-owned group, will absorb RBB’s full workforce of more than 100, ensuring continuity for the teams, clients and business partners. Based in Teningen, Graf is a European market leader in the rainwater harvesting market and active in the decentralised wastewater treatment sector, with a workforce of more than 650, active in 12 countries, and commercialises its products in more than 80 countries. It has also been active in France for over 50 years, a core market for RBB Group, which is a leader in the passive decentralised wastewater treatment sector. Leveraging on Rotomade’s rotational moulding expertise, RBB develops, manufactures and commercialises Biorock decentralised wastewater solutions and has recently expanded its product range into innovative semi-decentralised wastewater solutions through a new Biorotor product. With production plants in Luxembourg and France, the group distributes its products globally through several joint ventures. “Through this acquisition, we are also further strengthening our footprint in our core French market, next to our current operations in Dachstein,” says Graf Group CEO Otto Graf, noting that the RBB team and the group’s wastewater treatment solutions will complement the company’s current product suite. “For more than 20 years, RBB has developed to become a leading player in the decentralised wastewater treatment and rotational moulding space,” adds RBB Group CEO Antoine Machado. “In an ever-changing environment, investments, innovative product development and speed to market are key for continued success. With Graf Group, I have found the ideal partner to capture the significant opportunities that lie ahead, while providing continuity to all stakeholders.” “My team and I are excited to join the Graf family as we continue to expand our presence in the decentralized wastewater treatment market,” says Biorock Africa MD David Light. He adds that Biorock Africa, in which RBB has a 50% shareholding, remains committed to bringing innovative, appropriate wastewater treatment technologies to the continent to address the increasing challenges of dignified sanitation and water security. “This merger affords us access to additional technologies to support and accelerate our vision for the continent.” Biorock trickling filter systems cater for single households and small communities up to 180 persons, whereas the Biorotor Rotating Biological Contactor systems modularly accommodate communities of 200 to 5 000 persons. PwC Luxembourg acted as lead mergers and acquisitions adviser and provided financial vendor due diligence services to RBB Group.