South Africa has this month (January) become the latest, and first African, member of the international Human Frontier Science Programme organisation (HFSP). The HFSP promotes international collaboration in basic research focused on sophisticated and complex mechanisms found in living organisms. It does so by awarding research grants and funding postdoctoral fellowships. The HFSP was the result of a Japanese initiative and commenced functioning in 1989, making its first awards in 1990. Its current membership is Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Republic of (South) Korea, Singapore, Switzerland, the UK, the US, plus those European Union countries that are not part of the Group of Seven largest democratic economies collectively represented by the European Commission. South Africa will be represented in the HFSP jointly by the South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC) and the National Research Foundation (NRF). The aim of the SAMRC is to improve the health and life quality of South Africans, through research and development (R&D), and technology transfer, and to strengthen the country’s health systems. Its primary research foci included HIV/Aids, tuberculosis, cardiovascular and non-communicable diseases, drug and alcohol abuse, and gender and health. The NRF exists to support R&D by way of funding, the development of human resources and the creation and support of the necessary research facilities. It also engages in public awareness of and interest in science, and supports government priorities. “This membership will be instrumental in ensuring that Africa becomes globally competitive in frontier research relating to life sciences, thereby promoting innovation and a transformed research system,” highlighted NRF CEO Dr Fulufhelo Nelwamondo. “This partnership will have a fundamental impact on building South Africa’s capacity and global influence in life sciences for the greater benefit of society,” affirmed SAMRC president and CEO Professor Glenda Gray. The HFSP has so far awarded more than 4 500 research grants and postdoctoral fellowships to more than 7 500 scientists around the world. To date, 28 beneficiaries of HFSP awards have later won Nobel Prizes. By being admitted to the HFSP (which was through a competitive application process), South Africa will be able to increase the development of its scientific and innovation skills, by being able to participate in what the NRF calls “unique research and training programmes in the basic sciences, with specific emphasis on generating outcomes that have socio-economic impact and thereby benefit to society”.