Suzuki Auto South Africa (Suzuki SA) will launch its first hybrid in the local market this year, as well as a five-door version of the Jimny 4x4. The new Grand Vitara is expected in South Africa soon and will be the first Suzuki SA model to offer the option of a hybrid petrol-electric powertrain. The new Fronx sports-utility vehicle (SUV), set to follow, is expected to slot in below the Grand Vitara. The Fronx is one of the first new model ranges to be designed using Suzuki’s ‘Crafted Futurism’ design language. Under the skin, the new Fronx shares its basic platform with the new Swift and Baleno, while the suspension, steering and overall driving performance will be geared towards “customers who prefer an engaging and exhilarating drive”, notes Suzuki SA. The local arm of the Japanese car maker has also confirmed the highly anticipated five-door Jimny for the local market, adding to the popular three-door version. Suzuki has retained the current 1.5 l petrol engine in the new version, as well as the choice of five-speed manual or four-speed automatic transmission. It has also stuck to the off-roader’s ladder frame chassis, its 210 mm ground clearance and the four-wheel drive system. What has changed, however, are the dimensions. The five-door variant is 360 mm longer than the three-door derivative, while the vehicle’s width and height remain unchanged. The larger footprint has allowed the manufacturer to add two more doors and to expand the load compartment. This also means that the front seats fold flat to connect with the rear seats, to create two cushioned sleeping spaces for adventurers who want to spend the night inside the Jimny. “The five-door Jimny and the Fronx are both production-ready models and, while timing is still to be confirmed, both models are heading to South African shores,” says Suzuki SA. “[We] hope to add the new five-door Jimny to the local line-up sooner rather than later. More information on the local launch date, the exact line-up, specifications and range will be made available at a later stage,” notes the company.