The Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE) has appointed Yvonne Baker as its new CEO, to take up the post from April 2023, following Jon Prichard’s decision to step down from the role in September 2022. Baker, a chartered chemical engineer, is currently CE of STEM Learning, a provider of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and career support to schools, colleges and community groups across the UK, a role she has held for 12 years. During her time at STEM Learning, Baker is noted to have led the organisation through an ever-changing education, STEM and economic environment, including the unprecedented challenges of a global pandemic. Increasing the organisation’s income by about 300%, Baker’s focus on demonstrating impact enabled STEM Learning to increase its funding from government, charities and industry, providing support to every school across the UK and almost every science teacher. She was awarded an Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the late Queen’s 2022 New Year Honours List for services to STEM education. “I am delighted to announce Yvonne as IChemE’s new CEO. She brings a wealth of senior leadership experience managing membership organisations as well as working with a wide range of different stakeholders. “As a chemical engineer and IChemE member herself, Yvonne fully understands the requirements of our members and I am confident that she will drive the Institution forward to meet the challenges and opportunities ahead,” comments IChemE president David Bogle. “Yvonne will build on the substantial work undertaken by Jon during his tenure, continuing to grow IChemE to ensure the Institution represents and supports the chemical engineering profession to serve society. I look forward to working closely with her,” he adds. “Having started my journey in STEM as a chemical engineer and having been a member of IChemE since 1986, joining the Institution as its CEO is a great honour and hugely exciting. “Highlighting and articulating the importance and impact of all things and everyone involved in chemical, biochemical and process engineering has never been more vital as we work with others to address the global concerns around sustainability, food security, energy security and health. IChemE already does so much to support these efforts and I want to strengthen our ability to do still more as the world faces challenging but also exciting times ahead,” Baker says. She will join IChemE on April 12, taking over from interim CEO Jo Downham, who will revert to her position as director of finance and business support.