Train manufacturer the Gibela Rail Consortium is offering 150 bursaries in 2023 in engineering, manufacturing, computer science, supply chain and logistics, and various trade fields at universities and technical and vocational education and training (TVET) institutions. Gibela is calling for applications to be submitted by January 31. The bursaries include full tuition, a book allowance, accommodation and meals. The bursaries are granted for one year and are renewable on a yearly basis based on academic performance. Applicants must be South African citizens with South African identity documents and must be enrolled or intending to enrol at a South African TVET institution. Current N3 or N4 candidates are encouraged to apply. Similarly, applicants must also be enrolled or intending to enrol at a South African university or university of technology, and current first- and second-year candidates are encouraged to apply. All applicants must demonstrate potential for academic success, and must be in need of financial assistance, the company added. Gibela bursaries for study at a university or university of technology are available in the electrical, electronic, mechanical, metallurgical, and industrial engineering disciplines, computer science and information technology, accounting, and supply chain and logistics management. Further, Gibela bursaries to study at TVET institutions are available for boilermakers, electricians, mechanics, welders, millwrights, patternmakers, vehicle-builders, plumbers, control and instrumentation technicians, and fitters and turners. “The bursary applications close on January 31, 2023. Applicants must send a short curriculum vitae, a certified copy of the applicants' academic records and a certified copy of their South African identity documents to gibelabursaries@communityrail.co.za or fax these to 086 246 2666.” However, Gibela will respond only to applicants who make it through the first round of assessments. If applicants have not been contacted by February 28, they must consider their applications to be unsuccessful, it noted. “Tertiary education benefits not just the individual, but society as a whole. Graduates of tertiary education are more environmentally conscious, have healthier habits, and have a higher level of civic participation … In short, tertiary education institutions prepare individuals not only by providing them with adequate and relevant job skills, but also by preparing them to be active members of their communities and societies,” Gibela said in a statement, quoting a World Bank study. “The economic returns for tertiary education graduates are the highest in the entire educational system – an estimated 17% increase in earnings as compared with 10% for primary and 7% for secondary education. These high returns are even greater in sub-Saharan Africa, at an estimated 21% increase in earnings for tertiary education graduates,” it highlighted. Gibela is the only train manufacturer in Africa. From its plant in Dunnottar, Ekurhuleni, Gauteng, Gibela is producing 600 new train sets for the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa. Gibela has produced more than 100 X’trapolis Mega commuter trains to date. Further, Gibela is an empowered company and, in addition to its core function of manufacturing trains, revitalising South’s Africa’s rail industry and enhancing commuter experience by producing faster, safer and more environment-friendly trains than the previous ones on South Africa's tracks, the company is also heavily committed to uplifting South African communities. One of the ways it does this is by offering more than 100 bursaries each year for tertiary study at universities, universities of technology and TVET institutions, it said.