President Cyril Ramaphosa must appoint a competent person to the “critical portfolio” of Transport Minister; someone “who is able to bring order, stability and accountability to the sector”, says Intercape CEO Johann Ferreira. This follows the handing down earlier this month of yet another judgment against Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula by the Makhanda High Court in the Eastern Cape. The judgment is the latest development in a battle by long-distance coach operator Intercape to force government to address a campaign of terror directed at the company. Intercape says it has been the target of almost 150 incidents, including shootings and stonings, with not “a single conviction, despite overwhelming evidence”. In September last year, Intercape approached the Makhanda High Court to force Mbalula and the MEC for Transport in the Eastern Cape to put in place “reasonable and effective measures” to provide for the safety and security of long-distance bus drivers and passengers in the Eastern Cape. The High Court agreed, and on September 30 ordered the parties to urgently draft a plan of action. In October, Mbalula appealed the order. Mbalula’s application for leave to appeal was heard on December 14. On January 10, the Makhanda High Court dismissed Mbalula’s application for leave to appeal with costs. Mbalula was late last year elected as secretary-general of the ANC, a full-time position at the party’s headquarters in Luthuli House in Johannesburg. This means he will have to vacate his ministerial position, with President Ramaphosa expected to announce a Cabinet reshuffle in the coming weeks. “Now that [Mbalula] has to vacate his Cabinet position, it is our hope that President Ramaphosa – if he is truly serious about reform – will appoint a minister who will bring order and stability back to the transport sector,” says Ferreira. “That is all we needed Minister Mbalula to do, but that was clearly beyond him.” Ferreira also accused Police Minister Bheki Cele of failing in his duties. “It is our intention to follow the same legal approach with Minister Cele as we have with Minister Mbalula. “Both have failed in their Constitutional obligations and we are turning to the courts to force them to act.” Ferreira says Intercape will soon restart operations in five Eastern Cape towns which had become no-go zones after local taxi associations prevented long-distance coaches from operating on what they view as their turf. The no-go zones include Cofimvaba, Butterworth, Engcobo, Tshomo and Idutywa.