In 2023, French car maker Peugeot aims for 100% of the vehicles in its range to be electrified. Over the course of the next two years, it will also launch five new fully electric models. The term ‘electric’ refers to battery electric vehicles (BEVs), while the term ‘electrified’ also includes hybrids and plug-in-hybrids. “Peugeot is committed to the electrification of its range,” says Peugeot brand CEO Linda Jackson. “Our ambition is simple: to make Peugeot the leading electric brand in Europe by 2030. “This objective and ambitious vision pave the way for a radical transformation of the brand. It is embodied in the Peugeot Inception Concept [vehicle] which marks the beginning of a new era.” Stellantis, the local distributor of the Peugeot brand, notes that the range of powertrains available in South Africa will depend on “regulations, opportunities and market specificities”. The company adds that while there is a strong push toward electric vehicles in Europe, Peugeot will still offer hybrids and internal combustion engines to other markets, such as South Africa. However, that does not mean that South Africa will miss out of the electric revolution. “We have a variety of electric models in various stages of planning and testing, with a view of local availability starting in the short term and ramping up,” says a spokesperson for Stellantis South Africa. Inception Concept
Peugeot says its Inception concept vehicle “heralds a new era and embodies the brand's vision for future electric vehicles”. It is designed on one of the four future Stellantis group BEV-by-design platforms, set to arrive from this year onwards. Specifically created for electrification, these platforms offer major differences in terms of architecture, with designers leveraging these changes to reshape the passenger compartment. The 100% electric Inception is equipped with 800 V technology. Its 100 kWh battery enables it to travel 800 km on a single full charge. The battery charges the equivalent of 30 km of range in one minute, or 150 km in five minutes. The vehicle can be recharged by induction.