Tyre manufacturer Sumitomo Rubber South Africa (SRSA) is on the hunt for 48 township entrepreneurs who could qualify for startup support to run their own local tyre centres. SRSA is manufacturer of the Dunlop brand and has launched the business-in-a-box concept as an extension of its Dunlop container store project. The programme offers a plug-and-play solution through which shortlisted candidates are linked with recommended funders to apply for 100% funding to set up their own Dunlop Fitment Centres, and to become part of a growing network of more than 80 Dunlop container outlets employing around 400 people across the country. In short: through the business-in-a-box concept, successful candidates take ownership of a 12-metre Dunlop-branded container with equipment, retail software, startup stock and point-of-sale material. The enterprise also includes a reception area, a workshop with tyre changing equipment, and a storage facility stocked with tyres. Entrepreneurs will be trained at one of SRSA’s technical, training and retail centres to gain the skills necessary for their business to succeed. In addition, they will also receive legal and regulatory support, marketing support and business mentoring. “Dunlop has a proud history of entrepreneurship – it’s how the brand was established over 130 years ago,” says SRSA CEO Lubin Ozoux. “Over the years, we've had great success with our Dunlop container project, which was started in 2012 to drive sustainable township entrepreneurship and promote safety on the road. “We are serious about playing a role in tackling high unemployment, the majority of which is young people in rural areas and townships.” The Dunlop container project, he notes, has enabled informal tyre businesses, often trading from makeshift, roadside facilities, to be transformed into proper Dunlop-branded fitment centres, where they can offer high-quality and affordable tyres, as well as tyre services to their communities, while also creating jobs. “Through our new business-in-a-box concept, successful applicants will receive the funding and support they need to run their own thriving tyre businesses, offering tyre fitment, tyre repairs, wheel balancing and rotation, and more,” explains Ozoux. “It’s all about finding the right entrepreneurs and ensuring they are equipped to be successful and well supported for their journey.” The longer-term vision is that these entrepreneurs will be able to grow and develop their businesses from entry-level enterprises serving the person-in-the-street, to businesses that can support the taxi industry, and government departments, thus creating more job opportunities, says Ozoux. “This would also positively impact the greater awareness about tyres, and counter the use of dangerous second-hand tyres, through training and education on tyre safety.” To apply for the Dunlop Business in a Box programme visit www.dunloptyres.co.za/business-in-a-box. Applicants must be South African and 18 years old or above.