Electrical equipment and services multinational Schneider Electric and South African educational equipment manufacturer Amtec Techniquip have extended their collaboration beyond the Southern African Development Community's borders into Nigeria. The partnership has, since its inception three years ago, accelerated access to education through the provision of state-of-the-art training equipment to tertiary institutions, such as Didactic benches that bridge the gap between theory and practice and form a critical part of vocational training. The partnership is funded by the Schneider Electric Foundation. “There is dire need for high-quality electrical and engineering training education equipment in Nigeria. Through our partnership with Amtec Techniquip, we hope to emulate the success of our counterparts in Southern Africa and provide students with equipment that will support and accelerate their studies as electricians and engineers,” says Schneider Electric access to education, sustainable development and academy project manager DL Steyl. Schneider Electric and Amtec Techniquip will provide tertiary institutions in Nigeria with training options, namely domestic wiring solutions, industrial wiring solution, the industrial automation solution, the home automation bench and the solar solution. “Amtec Techniquip offers entrenched experience in the electrical educational training space and has been a valuable partner over the past three years. The equipment is professional and meets the highest standards set by Schneider Electric,” said Steyl. Schneider Electric’s collaboration with Amtec Techniquip underscores the company’s ongoing commitment to providing world-class equipment to institutions across Anglophone Africa. The equipment is, for example, used at Schneider Electric Education Centre network partners, as well as Schneider Electric partners and customers in Southern Africa. “We are thrilled to now include Nigeria as part of our collaboration with Schneider Electric. The past three years have been rewarding and complemented our company’s passion for providing quality engineering education equipment,” said Amtec Techniquip sales director Roger Forte.