United Arab Emirates (UAE) clean energy company Masdar has signed agreements with the energy ministries of Angola, Uganda and Zambia to develop renewable energy projects totalling 5 GW. The agreements were signed under the umbrella of the Etihad 7 initiative, which was launched by the UAE last year. The initiative is aimed at building 20 GW of renewable energy capacity on the continent and with it supply 100-million people across the continent with clean electricity. UAE Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation Minister Shakhboot Nahyan al Nahyan says the UAE and African nations share a firm belief in the tremendous potential that clean energy offers Africa to unlock economic and climate action progress. Masdar chairperson Dr Sultan Al Jaber says the latest agreements follow on a 2 GW renewable energy development agreement the company signed with Tanzania last year and will also serve to transform local communities. Particularly, Masdar will assist the Angolan and Zambians government to build projects totalling 2 GW of capacity each, while it will support the Ugandan government with building 1 GW of renewable energy projects. The projects will be built in a phased manner over the next ten years. Masdar ultimately aims to deliver 100 GW of clean energy around the world by 2030. With Africa’s massive projected development and growth, as well as low current clean energy penetration levels, Masdar sees enormous potential for the renewable energy sector on the continent. Masdar has an established presence in Africa, having formed its Infinity Power Holding joint venture with Egypt’s Infinity branch to target opportunities on the continent. In November, Masdar and Infinity Power, as well as Hassan Allam Utilities, signed an agreement with the Egyptian government to develop a 10 GW onshore wind project, which will be one of the largest wind farms in the world once it is built. The same three companies will also collaborate on the development of green hydrogen projects in Egypt, targeting a combined electrolyser capacity of 4 GW by 2030, and an output of up to 480 000 t/y of green hydrogen. Masdar also has projects in Mauritania, Morocco and Seychelles.