Audi South Africa (SA), in partnership with sustainable technology group Rubicon, has brought 43 additional electric vehicle (EV) charging stations online across the country. These chargers can accommodate a total of 57 EVs at varying capacity and regardless of model or brand. This is in addition to the brand’s rollout of 70 EV charging connection points nationwide a year ago, when Audi brought ultrafast chargers to South Africa. The latest rollout includes the very first DC 200 kW ultrafast charger in South Africa, says the German premium brand. This installation, powered by solar energy, can be found at the Mall of Africa in Midrand, Gauteng, and can charge the battery of an e-tron GT within roughly 15 minutes, says Audi. The rest of the car maker’s second phase investment comprises four 100 kW (DC), eight 60 kW (DC), five 25 kW (DC) and twenty-five 22 kW (AC) charger installations at locations across the country. “EVs are the future of mobility and we’re investing not just in hardware infrastructure, but in making electric mobility simpler and more widely available for South Africans, thus enabling the local EV market to grow,” says Audi SA head Sascha Sauer. The partnership between Audi, charging company GridCars and Rubicon includes a roaming agreement, which allows billing cards to be interoperable across the two networks, making charging accessible for Audi e-tron customers, as well as users of other EV brands. “While loadshedding is a reality to which South Africans have become accustomed, it is worth pointing out that our charging network also capitalises on solar installations, where possible, to keep the charging stations optimally operational,” adds Sauer. “With a range between 350 km and 480 km the Audi e-tron models typically do not require a charge every day, so depending on driving style and daily commuting distances, owners will be able to find their nearest charging station and charge their vehicles regularly with ease.” Rubicon Energy and E-mobility director Greg Blandford notes that as public interest in EVs grows, so will the drive to integrate charging infrastructure, renewable energy and energy storage systems. “The global adoption of artificial intelligence, smart devices, greener technologies and carbon reduction initiatives has highlighted and accelerated the adoption of EVs. “Local availability of more and more EVs, coupled with an increase in fossil fuel costs, will be a major catalyst for EV adoption in South Africa.” Audi’s added 43 chargers can be found in six provinces. There are 15 in Gauteng; 11 in the Western Cape; 10 in the Eastern Cape; four in KwaZulu-Natal; two in Mpumalanga; and one in the Free State.