The South African (SA) Mint Company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the South African Reserve Bank, has introduced the penultimate collection in the second series of the Big 5 collectable range of coins, featuring the leopard. The Big 5 coin range celebrates the five animals that represent Southern Africa’s wildlife. “According to the demand trends we have observed over the years, the Big 5 collection is now firmly entrenched among the world’s coveted numismatic offerings. It is a coin range we are immensely proud of, that we will continue to innovate in order to maintain its relevance for years to come. “We have, of course, set very high standards for product longevity with the Krugerrand and can only hope to emulate this success with newer products such as the Big 5,” says SA Mint MD Honey Mamabolo. Series II of the Big 5 succeeds the award-winning Series I, originally launched in 2019. The latest series offers collectors a subtle but telling design change with the portrait of the animal on the obverse side of the coins, the SA Mint points out. The reverse design remains the same throughout the two series – two halves of the animal’s face, which complete and form a full face when two or more coins are placed side-by-side. In addition to the full face of the leopard on the obverse of the leopard coins, are the words “Big Five 2023” and the South African coat of arms, signifying their status as legal tender. The leopard coins are available in gold, silver and platinum. The platinum offering consists of a single 1 oz coin, while the silver range comprises a 1 oz brilliant uncirculated coin, a 1 oz double capsule set, containing two silver proof coins, and a special Big 5 and Krugerrand leopard privy mark combination set. The gold range includes a 1 oz gold proof, a quarter-ounce gold proof and a quarter-ounce gold proof double capsule set, containing two identical gold proof coins. The gold coins too, are complemented by a Big 5 and Krugerrand leopard privy mark combination set comprising a 1 oz gold proof Big 5 coin and a 1 oz gold proof Krugerrand coin.