Brazilian major aerospace group Embraer and New Zealand flag carrier Air New Zealand have signed an agreement to cooperate in the development of sustainable aviation for the low-carbon energy future. In terms of the agreement, Air New Zealand joins Embraer’s Energia project as a member of the Energia Advisory Group, and Embraer joins the airline’s Mission Next Gen Aircraft initiative. The Energia Advisory Group is composed of manufacturers, airlines, leasing companies and others with aviation expertise. Its purpose is to advise the airframer regarding its Energia project, which aims to develop sustainable commercial aircraft. Mission Next Gen Aircraft is intended to stimulate the development of zero-carbon emissions regional aircraft for operation by the airline in New Zealand. Its domestic network links 20 different regions in its homeland, providing both passenger and cargo services. “As the global leader in regional aircraft, Embraer is ideally positioned to bring disruptive technologies to smaller aircraft first,” highlighted Embraer Commercial Aviation president and CEO Arjan Meijer. “Air New Zealand, operator of a large, complex, and diverse regional network, is the perfect collaborator and we’re proud to be a part of this initiative. Smaller, regional aircraft are going to be the first platforms on which new fuel and propulsion systems can be introduced effectively. Embraer looks forward to contributing to Air New Zealand’s initiative and also adding their expertise and requirements into Embraer’s Energia project.” “We want to be a leader in the roll-out of zero emissions aircraft in New Zealand,” stressed Air New Zealand chief sustainability officer Kiri Hannifin. “Having Embraer as one of our long-term partners will grow our collective understanding of zero emissions aircraft technology as it develops and will give them the confidence they are developing a product that’s viable for us.” A ’business-as-usual’ approach would not allow the airline to achieve its ambitious sustainability goals, she pointed out. Hence Mission Next Gen Aircraft, which involved the carrier cooperating with airframers, innovators and infrastructure providers. Embraer’s Energia project is exploring options for the development of sustainable aircraft capable of carrying up to 50 passengers. The interim target is to reduce carbon emissions by 50% by 2030. Currently, the airframer is looking at a variety of energy sources as well as at different propulsion and airframe architectures.