Automotive partner Continental Tyre South Africa (CTSA) has welcomed Matt Livigni as its new MD, noting that he brings a wealth of experience to the company, thanks to his 33-year career with Continental. Prior to joining CTSA, Livigni was MD of Continental Tire Canada for six years, and also served as executive director of the Tire and Rubber Association of Canada over the same period. Livigni succeeds Martin Buday, who headed up the South African operations from 2020, and has since been appointed to lead Continental’s South East Europe division. Livigni has held various roles at Continental, including sales, marketing and product management, with a particular emphasis on the commercial vehicle tyre (CVT) segment. Between 2008 and 2013, he was Continental Tire’s Northern Region manager in the US for CVT, followed by three years as the CVT country manager for Canada before being appointed MD in 2017. Having moved to South Africa in January this year, Livigni’s main objectives for his local tenure are focused on sustainability. “The number one priority for me is to ensure the sustainability of local manufacturing of premium tyres for the domestic market, supported by cost-competitive exports that enable future investments and the long-term stability of our plant here in South Africa. “At Continental, we are excited about adapting the materials and production of our tyres to contribute to a better, more sustainable future. For me, this is one of the biggest challenges ahead, which will affect our whole value chain,” Livigni says. As a people-oriented company, he says, he believes in empowering Continental’s employees, while also making a positive contribution to the broader community. “We need to continue providing opportunities for both professional and personal development and growth for our staff at every level, while simultaneously addressing the issues of diversity, equity and inclusion. “At the same time, we have a key role to play in supporting economic growth as a means of creating new job opportunities for all South Africans to tackle the high levels of unemployment,” he comments. While serving as a director at the Tire and Rubber Association of Canada, Livigni worked alongside his colleagues in developing a comprehensive waste tyre management and recycling programme, and says he is eager to share this knowledge with the local industry. “The waste tyre recycling systems in Canada are very well managed and extremely effective in recycling the majority of tyres in the country. Unfortunately, this is not the case in South Africa, as a lot of waste tyres are not recycled, and the dumping of tyres remains a major concern due to the impact it has on the environment. “A well-managed tyre recycling programme has the potential to not only address the environmental issues but will significantly bolster job creation in the related industries. I plan to work with the industry bodies and all relevant stakeholders to significantly expand the country’s recycling initiatives while contributing to the overall sustainability of the local tyre manufacturing sector,” he says.