JSE-listed Growthpoint Properties has launched its newly revamped landmark office property at The Place at 1 Sandton Drive in Sandton Central, and its own Gauteng head office, which is in the building, following completion of the refurbishment process in December. The refurbishment of the 36 000 m2 property took about a year, and was completed in December, within the deadline and within budget, Growthpoint South Africa CEO Estienne de Klerk noted during a tour of the property on February 21. He said this was despite it being a complicated process, considering that people were in office during the undertaking. Growthpoint spent just over R50-million on the refurbishment, which included refurbishment of its head office which had not been done since it occupied the space in 2007. De Klerk outlined the rationale for undertaking this revamp as the property providing good location access, and Growthpoint believes that, as a P-grade building with the correct kind of interior refurbishment, it presents an attractive option to tenants despite the difficulties of operating in the Sandton market. This has been reflected, he noted, with the interest shown and the building being well let. The new property is said to reflect the changing work environment and is designed to be conducive to the new way of working. For all tenants of The Place at 1 Sandton Drive, the refurbishment enables shared amenities for businesses and their staff, which reduces private office space needs. It aims to optimise connections and collaboration, with several shared spaces and open access areas, as well as a central reception area. There are also quieter, more private meeting spaces if required. Moreover, there are two communal balcony areas, with one closed off to provide a buffer from outside noise. De Klerk said the other balcony had been left open for the possibility of building a bridge from there to Sandton City Shopping Centre, which is directly opposite, with Growthpoint still exploring the possibility of connecting the two properties for ease of access. There is also an area for deliveries. In terms of sustainability, Growthpoint disposed of its old furniture by reusing it in satellite offices, donating it to non-profits and selling it to staff to raise R100 000 for Impilo Child Protection and Adoption Services, Genesis Safe Place, Meals on Wheels, Door of Hope, Home of Hope, She Stands Tall, Action Development Agency, and education support of Botshabelo and Thandanani. The refurbishment is also said to have improved electricity consumption with energy efficient lighting, and the energy performance of the building is being assessed for further environment innovative improvements. There is generator capacity to mitigate against loadshedding, with solar power not deemed appropriate to deliver the requisite backup power required to meet the property’s needs. However, De Klerk said that Growthpoint is exploring ramping up solar opportunities at industrial and other properties to ensure more sustainability. Growthpoint worked with Paragon Interiors for the new lobby design at The Place and with Thinkspace for its new reception, meeting area and office interiors. Removing the hard divides between spaces to create an atmosphere that is more energised and connected was key to the design briefs for both areas. As alluded to, the ground floor arrival area at The Place at 1 Sandton Drive has been defined to create a single point of entry for the building. However, once signed through the concierge point, which includes a waiting area and meeting pods, people can move freely around the new lobby area. The lobby has been redesigned to include multiple meeting, collaboration and working options.  A new lobby coffee shop for the building will open in March. A dedicated community manager is responsible for a programme of amenities, activities and events in the lobby that appeal to building users. Services vary from nail technicians and hairdressers to dry cleaning, stationery and health checks. Focusing on Growthpoint’s office space, the new reception and meeting area is open to the lobby, so the common amenities form part of its work ecosystem. Growthpoint’s new reception also introduces an easily updatable installation showcasing the impacts of its long-running corporate environmental, social and governance initiatives. These stories are displayed around a new coffee bar with an in-house barista, stationed at Growthpoint’s front door, which is aimed at increasing collaboration between visitors and staff. Growthpoint’s newly renovated offices include a variety of different rooms and spaces for different purposes, from small private rooms from which to conduct online meetings, to lounge areas, desks, hot desks, stand-up desks, meeting pods, and pause areas. Growthpoint is still adding more amenities and improvements to the property. Less than six months ago, it launched its ready-to-occupy office concept, WorkAgility, which is noted to be performing well. Growthpoint will be introducing a WorkAgility show unit at its Sandton address, which will be ready for plug-and-play occupation in April. In addition, the bathrooms on level B1 will also be upgraded to make them more amenable to people who cycle or run to work, with bathrooms and showers.