Norway-based global assurance and risk management group DNV has announced that it is launching the second phase of the joint industry project (JIP) to develop a new set of standards, or code, to cover the design, construction, re-qualification and operation of offshore pipelines to transport hydrogen (either in pure form or blended with natural gas). This JIP is called H2Pipe, and Phase 1 of the project, which was an initial test programme, was launched in 2021. DNV has forecast that, out to 2050, worldwide, more than 50% of hydrogen pipelines will be repurposed from current natural gas pipeline networks. In some regions, this figure would reach 80%. Repurposing is also expected to cost less than 35% of building new pipelines. Although hydrogen is a less efficient energy carrier than electricity, it had two very major potential roles in future green energy systems. It will likely be essential as a low-carbon energy source for hard-to-decarbonise sectors, such as aviation, shipping and industrial processes requiring high temperatures. And it can function as a chemical energy storage medium, helping balance out the variable power supply from intermittent renewable energy sources such as solar and wind. Such an energy storage role will allow the management of energy supply and demand dynamics, preventing stress on electricity transmission grids. Further, in some countries with already existing extensive natural gas pipeline networks, like the UK, it will be cheaper to supply hydrogen gas directly to customers through those networks than to switch those customers to electricity. “DNV is committed to the energy transition and plays an active role in supporting its customers removing risks around the implementation of clean energy solutions like hydrogen,” highlighted DNV Energy Systems regional director: Northern Europe Prajeev Rasiah. “We invest in initiatives such as the FutureGrid Project at our Spadeadam Test Facility in the UK, for the purpose of understanding how a gas transmission network will need to be developed and operated, to deliver sufficient quantities of hydrogen safely. This JIP for offshore pipelines is another contribution in the move to decarbonise the energy system, and to ensure an efficient and safe hydrogen infrastructure.” To start late next month, Phase 2 of H2Pipe will run for two years. A major (but not sole) element will be the execution of a comprehensive programme of experimental tests, which will increase knowledge of hydrogen embrittlement processes and how hydrogen affects line pipe material integrity. Other important aspects of Phase 2 will be the design of offshore hydrogen pipelines, at feasibility study level, and an offshore hydrogen pipeline safety risk assessment study. “The primary outcome of the JIP is expected to be a detailed guideline offering specific guidance for use in design and repurposing of offshore pipelines for hydrogen transport,” explained DNV.