Major US carrier United Airlines (United) has announced the establishment, jointly with a number of corporate partners, of a “first-of-its-kind” fund, worth more than $100-million, to support the development of sustainable aviation. Entitled the United Airlines Ventures Sustainable Flight Fund, it is an investment vehicle to support startup companies focused on sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) research, technology and production. The airline’s inaugural partners in this fund are Air Canada, GE Aerospace, Honeywell and JPMorgan Chase. Other companies can become partners in the fund, if they so desire. United is one of only two American operators to directly connect the US with South Africa. It operates from Newark/New York to both Johannesburg and Cape Town and back, as well as between Washington DC and Cape Town. “Solving climate change is doable but it requires hard work and real leadership,” affirms United CEO Scott Kirby. “This fund is unique. It’s not about offsets or things that are just greenwashing. Instead, we’re creating a system that drives investment to build a new industry around [SAF], essentially from scratch. That’s the only way we can actually decarbonise aviation." United Airlines Ventures, an entity of the airline, has already been investing in SAF-focused startups. Over the past two years, for example, it has funded startups Cemvita, Dimensional Energy and NEXT Renewable Fuels. United has also invested in the future production of almost 11.36-billion litres of SAF, which is believed to be the biggest such order placed by any airline in the world. SAF is made from various feedstocks, including agricultural wastes and animal byproducts as well as cooking oil. But it could also be made from forest waste and household rubbish, among other possible sources. Using SAF reduces aviation greenhouse gases significantly, compared with the use of only conventional jet fuel. Use of 100% SAF could cut aviation greenhouse gas emissions by up to 80%. However, currently, aviation regulators required that SAF be used in blends with conventional jet fuel, up to a maximum of 50% SAF. Work is ongoing, around the world, to achieve regulatory approval for the use of 100% SAF in commercial flights. Also, as of Tuesday, United’s website and app will allow passengers to see an estimate of the carbon footprints generated by their flights on the carrier. If they wish, they will be able to select lower carbon emission flight options. United is the first US carrier to offer such a service.