The global representative body for the airline industry, the International Air Transport Association (IATA), has highlighted the role of commercial aviation in the relief and rescue efforts under way in south-east Türkiye and northern Syria, following two devastating earthquakes in that area. The earthquakes struck on February 6. The first had a magnitude of 7.8, while the second was recorded at 7.7. So far, in Türkiye alone, more than 35 000 people have been reported as having been killed. “This tragedy has deeply moved us and the world,” emphasised IATA director-general Willie Walsh. “On behalf of IATA member airlines, we express our deep sorrow to the people of Türkiye and Syria. Out thoughts are with all those who are impacted by this horrific event. We salute the heroic efforts of the rescue workers who have saved many people and continue to search for and look after survivors. Aviation is playing a major role in supporting these efforts and in delivering the humanitarian aid that will be critical in sustaining people through the recovery.” Naturally, IATA member airlines based in and immediately around the affected region are heavily involved in supporting the ongoing rescue and relief efforts. These are Corendon Airlines, Freebird Airlines, MNG Airlines, Pegasus Airlines, SunExpress, SyrianAir and Turkish Airlines. But airlines from much further away are also helping. These include Aegean Airlines, Azerbaijan Airlines, El Al, Emirates, Euroatlantic Airways, FedEx, FlyBaghdad, KamAir, Lufthansa Cargo, Middle East Airlines – Air Liban, Mongolian Airlines, Pakistan International Airlines, Qatar Airways Cargo, Saudia Cargo, Smartwings Group, and Wamos Air. The coordination of donated airline resources and the needs of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in times of crisis is helped by non-profit organisation Airlink (not to be confused with the South African airline with the same name). Airlink is currently working with 19 airlines (and this number is growing) to support almost 50 NGOs operating in the earthquake-devastated area. As of Tuesday, Airlink had secured a “pipeline” of nearly 450 t of humanitarian cargo, that it was planning to transport to the disaster zone.