The Baobab project has installed a number of what it calls ‘smart poles’ at various sites across the Saldanha Bay municipality (SBM). The Baobab project partners SBM with technology groups Amoeba TSC and Zoom Fibre. Fibre is about more than just connecting to the Internet, explains Zoom Fibre MD Mohamed Asmal. “Fibre is about unleashing the power of a digital future and we are doing this right now in the SBM, and we will take these learnings and apply them to other regions where Zoom Fibre has coverage.” The Vredenburg-based company currently manages the smart pole project. “At this point in time, the poles are able to provide smart lighting, being light-emitting diode (LED) lights that automatically switch off when enough natural sunlight is present,” explains Asmal. “They also shine brighter when foot or vehicle traffic is detected, and dim when there is no traffic. The smart LED lights allow for noticeable savings in energy usage, notes Asmal. “This is further emphasised by the renewable energy sources – solar cells and bi-directional wind turbines – integrated in the smart dome, which is a first in South Africa. “We have taken the functionality of the poles further by providing security measures in terms of Internet protocol CCTV cameras. “Currently, the cameras are capable of facial recognition and licence plate recognition (characteristics only, not personal details), recognising people behaviour, and intrusion detection.” In future, any new functionality can be built into the analytic system of the cameras, says Asmal. “The only factors required to enable these functionalities are a demand for them and the development time of the specific analytic capability, should it not already exist. “With Internet-of-Things technology, almost anything is possible,” notes Asmal. “Weather conditions can be monitored, air pollution levels, crowds, electric vehicle charging stations. Again, if there is a demand, a solution can be provided.” Asmal notes that the smart poles are constantly monitored to prevent theft, but prefers not to share the details of the security systems. The SBM pilot project includes eight streetlights in Vredenburg, Saldanha and Langebaan. “These poles and their solutions will be monitored very closely until the data requirements and expectations have been met,” says Asmal. “We will continue to fine-tune the solution, where needed, to allow optimum operation. “We are actively researching the viability of expanding the current roll-out in SBM, and also across other areas in the country covered by the Zoom Fibre network, which is why this pilot is very important,” adds Asmal. “The concept is to unlock the full power and potential of fibre.” Potential future uses of the smart pole include the provision of WiFi hotspots.