JSE-listed Growthpoint Properties has broken ground on Phase 2 of Trade Park, a prime industrial park in the Mount Edgecombe industrial precinct in KwaZulu-Natal, north of Durban. This R180-million development is in response to demand for, and a scarcity of, quality A-grade warehouse facilities in the region, Growthpoint avers. Trade Park is a midi-unit industrial park comprising two phases of about 20 300 m2 and 21 600 m2, respectively. Phase 1 was completed in 2019 and comprises 15 A-grade units ranging in size from 1 000 m2 to 2 000 m2. Phase 2 broke ground at the end of January and comprises four new A-grade units ranging in size from 4 500 m2 to 6 500 m2. Located in the well-established area of Mount Edgecombe north on 52 Siphosetho road, and close to large residential, industrial and retail developments, the park provides easy access to the R102 and N2 freeways and is halfway between the busy Durban Harbour and King Shaka International Airport – about 20 km from each, Growthpoint points out. It says Mount Edgecombe has quickly become an established logistics node, driven by the new C3 Corridor road and a dearth of new industrial land around Durban Harbour. Growthpoint highlights the increasing growth of the nearby Cornubia development and the recent upgrade of the N2 and the M41 interchange. It says it identified a gap in the market for midi- and maxi-units in the Mount Edgecombe area several years ago. “Trade Park has been designed to meet this need with a first-class industrial park designed for businesses that rely on excellent transport access. Strong take-up in Trade Park Phase 1 is a testament to the fact that it is fulfilling a real requirement in the market,” comments Growthpoint KwaZulu-Natal regional head Greg Worst. The precinct design is informed by a conscious decision to separate the various functions within Trade Park and thereby maintain clear routes and links for people and vehicles. The functionality of the warehouses, the movement of trucks and industrial processes are all kept separate from the office links, where staff and visitors can move about freely. “Separating the offices from the industrial processes allows for a different treatment of the office spaces, which include more contemporary features and materials. It also provides the opportunity to create more outward-focused offices which overlook green areas,” says Worst. Landscaped gardens within the precinct are all fully maintained. The external form and aesthetic quality of the warehouses is said to be simple, functional and modern. Each warehouse will have its own offices and ablution facilities, as well as cantilevered roof canopies, in addition to roller shutter doors to ensure adequate weather protection at loading areas. Trade Park Phase 2 boasts features including 24/7 security and access control, a three-phase power supply, roof heights of 14 m to eaves and automatic sprinkler systems. Sustainable building practices ensure every aspect of this development is efﬁcient, cost-effective and sustainable, Growthpoint says. Energy efﬁcient air-conditioning, lighting and structural compliance for solar panels have been included in the design. Trade Park’s energy-efficient features include a host of energy-efficient lighting solutions in the warehouses and office spaces, as well as in external and security areas. Its design allows for as much natural light as possible within the buildings, which helps reduce electricity costs; hot water heat pumps; and roof insulation and external sun louvres, designed to reduce the energy needed for heating and cooling. The first units at Trade Park Phase 2 are currently being leased and will be ready for occupation from October.