US major aerospace and defence group Lockheed Martin announced, from the world-renowned Edwards Air Force Base (AFB) in the US State of California on Tuesday, that the VISTA X-62A research and development (R&D) aircraft had recently been flown by an artificial intelligence (AI) “agent” for more than 17 hours. This was the first time an AI had “engaged” on a tactical aircraft. VISTA is an acronym for Variable In-flight Simulation Test Aircraft. The X-62A is a modified F-16D tactical fighter (which is the two-seat version of the F-16C) and was originally redesignated as the NF-16D. Its further redesignation to X-62A signalled its role as a dedicated R&D aircraft, of national importance. The modified aircraft was developed by Lockheed Martin’s famous Skunk Works, jointly with US science and technology company Calspan. Basically, the X-62A functions as a flying simulation platform. It is equipped with an open systems architecture and is fitted with software permitting it to mimic other aircrafts’ performance characteristics. It is operated by the US Air Force (USAF) Test Pilot School (TPS) from Edwards AFB. “VISTA will allow us to parallelise the development and test of cutting-edge [AI] techniques with new uncrewed vehicle designs,” explained USAF TPS research director Dr M Christopher Cotting. “This approach, combined with focused testing on new vehicle systems as they are produced, will rapidly mature autonomy for uncrewed platforms and allow us to deliver tactically relevant capability to our warfighter.” Prior to the AI flight, which was one of a series of test flights conducted in December, the X-62A had undergone an upgrade. This included the fitting of an updated VISTA Simulation System (VSS), from Calspan, and a Model Following Algorithm (MFA), as well as a System for Autonomous Control of Simulation (SACS), from Lockheed Martin. The MFA and SACS are integrated together, increasing the capabilities of VISTA and allowing it to carry out very advanced autonomy and AI flight test experiments. “This new mission system capability with VSS, MFA and SACS emphasises advancing autonomous aircraft algorithm development and integration,” highlighted Lockheed Martin. “Additional SACS components include integration of advanced sensors, a Multi-Level Security solution, and a set of [rugged mobile technology company] Getac tablet displays in both cockpits. These components enhance VISTA’s capabilities while maintaining its rapid-prototyping advantage, specifically allowing for quick software changes to increase the frequency of flight test flights [sic] and accelerating the pace of AI and autonomy development to meet urgent national security needs.”