Resolving the energy crisis, growing the tourism sector and ensuring water security in KwaZulu-Natal were among the priorities discussed during the provincial planning Lekgotla last week.

The planning Lekgotla takes place ahead of the State of the Province Address, which will be held on February 24.

During the Lekgotla, Premier Nomusa Dube-Ncube said the impact of sustained loadshedding had derailed potential investments and investors, further causing untold damage to the economy of the province and the country at large.

“We need to give the urgent attention that loadshedding deserves as it is causing damage to human lives and to small businesses as a result. Loadshedding, as the President says, is a threat to the progress of our country and the development of its people. Without a steady supply of power, we will not achieve the objectives of growing the economy and creating employment.

“The real question is what interventions and strategic reforms we will introduce as the province from [generation] to transmission as we build energy security for our communities. How do we as a province leverage on the energy reforms that the President has announced to get into new markets, including hydrogen energy, independent power producers, bioethanol, biogas and biomass to stimulate job creation and small, medium-sized and enterprises development?” the Premier asked.

Meanwhile, she noted that the Provincial Water Master Plan for KwaZulu-Natal took cognisance of current and future demand for water and identified short-, medium- and long-term interventions to ensure water security in the province. The province also previously resolved to prioritise municipal budgets toward maintenance and announced many strategic infrastructure projects such as dams. War rooms were also created in all districts.

According to Dube-Ncube, the plan was to have projects on the ground dealing with water leaks, rehabilitating new infrastructure and resolving the water challenges facing communities.

“We need to see progress on the ground. In eThekwini, almost 50% of revenue is being lost to non-revenue water. We have created war rooms in all districts, but this war needs to be functional and have an impact. We are no longer in a crisis, but we are in an emergency with these issues. We can no longer have war rooms without adopting a war mentality. If you are in a war you need to be agile and acrobatic.” she said.

The Premier also said the province would make efforts to regain market share in the tourism sector.