Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Patricia de Lille has been requested by State-owned utility Eskom to expropriate servitudes, in terms of existing legislation, for electricity transmission lines on its behalf to allow it to supply more power to areas in Limpopo than what is currently possible. According to De Lille, all the affected owners were served with the application and given the opportunity to comment thereon. On February 3, she explained that the application was received from Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan on behalf of Eskom and was necessitated by the fact that the current transmission lines in Limpopo are inadequate and unable to meet the electricity demands of the region. Eskom has said it needs to strengthen its electricity network by upgrading an existing substation to increase the capacity of the power transmission system. As it stands, the current single feed transmission line into the region creates a risk for the province, De Lille said. The design and route of the required power lines crosses over State-owned and privately owned land. Since some privately owned land is affected by the design of the new power lines, Eskom has stated that the servitudes and new power lines do not impose detrimental effects in respect of these properties which cannot be addressed by reasonable compensation to private owners, which Eskom is willing to pay. Eskom also received an environmental authorisation from the Department of Environmental Affairs to build these new power lines. The route of the power lines was specifically authorised by the environmental authorisation in respect of the impact of the power lines on the environment and the interest of property owners. Following Eskom’s application to De Lille, some affected property owners entered into servitude agreements with Eskom and accepted an offer of compensation. The property owners who did not enter into servitude agreements were notified about the State’s intention to expropriate, she said, and they have been served with the necessary expropriation notices. The property owners were informed in their expropriation notices that the date of expropriation is January 31 and that the expropriated rights will be exercised by Eskom from February 1. The owners who have had their property expropriated have also been informed that they must deliver a written statement to De Lille within 60 days, with information such as the amount claimed by the owner as compensation and details of all improvements on the property which are affected by the expropriation of the servitudes. “It is important to note that the expropriation has been done strictly in terms of the applicable legislation,” De Lille said. She added that the energy crisis requires everyone to work together for the greater good, such as ensuring the provision of the necessary infrastructure to enhance electricity supply. The Department of Public Works and Infrastructure and Eskom have committed to finalising the matter and all administrative processes timeously and with due consideration to all circumstances so that electricity supply to the region can be improved.  “The increased capacity to provide electricity will support economic growth and development projects in the region,” De Lille said.