Dairy producer Woodlands Dairy has implemented several renewable energy resource projects at its large facility in Humansdorp aimed at replacing fossil fuels and reducing energy consumption and carbon emissions. The first step in a multi-phase solar initiative was completed in 2021, which consisted of 1 922 JA Solar photovoltaic modules and ten SolarEdge inverters and optimiser combinations, capable of generating 828 kW. The installed solar capacity is anticipated to provide 1.5 GWh/y of power, reducing the facility's carbon emissions by 588 t, equivalent to planting 17 558 trees each year. There are various benefits to using solar energy besides contributing to the reduction of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, said Woodlands Dairy sustainability manager André Adendorff. “Apart from the reduced dependence on the national utility supplier, there is very little to no impact on the environment, and the project is clean and responsible. Further, using solar power has long-term cost benefits and reduces the dependency on fossil fuels,” he added. The solar system implemented at Woodlands has been designed to be used by the dairy and support the diesel-generator loading while running on backup power. Additional solar phases are planned for the future, the dairy producer said. Additionally, a biomass boiler, which uses woodchips which are a waste product generated at the Longmore forest sawmill during the harvesting and milling process, was commissioned in 2016. The main objective of the boiler is to reduce use of heavy fuel oil (HFO) and electricity to generate steam for the plant. By changing over to a biomass boiler, the Humansdorp facility reduced its electric-boiler consumption by 40% and HFO consumption by 83%. A second biomass boiler is being commissioned early 2023 onwards, it said. Consumers increasingly see large companies as having a responsibility to the planet and society, and brands that focus on sustainability deliver more growth than those that do not, Adendorff said. “At Woodlands Dairy, sustainability is at the core of our business. We live in a time of extraordinary change. In business, we face challenges and opportunities that are more critical and complex than ever before, where the consequences of failure are unimaginable, and the impact of our decisions are felt instantly across the planet. “It is about moving the issues of sustainability from the fringes to the heart of the business. Further, ending poverty goes hand-in-hand with building economic growth and addressing social needs, such as education, health, social protection and employment opportunities, while addressing climate and environmental impact,” Adendorff said. “To ensure environmental health, social equity and economic prosperity for future generations, we need to balance our need to prosper economically with protecting the environment.”