The Umoya Energy Wind Farm situated on the West Coast, in the Western Cape, has painted the blades of its wind turbines as a mitigation measure to conserve avifauna. Blade painting entails the painting of one of the three blades on a wind turbine black or red. The effect of the single painted blade breaks up the so-called motion-smear experienced by most bird species that renders the blade invisible to them, explains renewable energy company Energy Infrastructure Management Services (EIMS) Africa, which owns Umoya. The painted blades greatly decrease the possibility of priority species birds flying into wind turbines, while having no impact on the power output that the wind farm is targeting. Following an avian fatality assessment undertaken by ornithologist, conservation biologist and Birds & Bats Unlimited CEO Dr Rob Simmons, it was suggested that these measures be implemented on site as a proactive measure, despite the low fatality rates recorded. “We successfully engaged and consulted with our wind turbine supplier to ensure the blade painting wouldn’t impact production and warrantees. Wind turbines are finely balanced machines. Adding any additional weight to wind turbine blades can affect their performance. The blade painting process, therefore, required various testing procedures and approvals,” says EIMS Africa and Umoya Energy Wind Farm CEO Ryan Hammond. He highlights the importance of consultation and that the success of this programme will help future wind farms to undertake similar programmes. One of the biggest undertakings was securing approval from the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA), Hammond points out. “However, leading the way with the SACAA will help us with future projects of this nature, as well as help our colleagues in the industry, as the foundations are now set.” The Umoya Wind Farm was also the first renewable energy project in South Africa to enter into a Biodiversity Offset Agreement with conservation agency South African National Parks, Hammond says.