Several projects led by the University of Nottingham’s Institute of Aerospace Technology (IAT) have received £10-million to fund research into the future of net-zero aviation. HECATE, NEWBORN and HERA are all part of the Clean Aviation Joint Undertaking, the European Union’s research and innovation programme for making the aviation industry ready for a sustainable future. The projects build on the significant outcomes delivered by the University of Nottingham in the development of electrification technologies over recent years, it says. “The aerospace industry hasn’t really changed since the jet engine revolutionised air travel in the 1950s. Therefore, technologies that will reduce our reliance on fossil fuel and improve the efficiency of flight are of ultimate importance to help us deliver the next great breakthrough in disruptive technologies. “We hope to have a major impact on the future of aviation through our involvement in these new, ambitious projects,” comments University of Nottingham IAT director Professor Serhiy Bozhko. Aviation needs to meet the ambitious targets of the European Green Deal, ultimately reaching climate neutrality by 2050, which means a step change is required to significantly reduce fuel burn, it is noted. For HECATE, the University of Nottingham team will be working on the high-power, power electronic converters required for the move towards hybrid-electrical aircrafts – including digitising a design process that will lead to the development of technology bricks. NEWBORN intends to bring aviation-graded fuel cells fed by liquid hydrogen into the market, for use in large, turbine-powered aircrafts, as soon as is safely possible. It will also address high power density, high-voltage energy conversion propulsion systems, and the next generation of microtube heat exchangers – with the ambition of achieving an overall propulsion system efficiency of 50% by the time the project ends in 2026. The University of Nottingham will be demonstrating an electrical drivetrain with electrical machine and power electronics reaching a step change in power density and efficiency. Finally, HERA aims to cut greenhouse-gas emissions and develop a brand new aircraft. At a size of about 50 to 100 seats, the aircraft will be ready for entry into service by the mid-2030s and will include hybrid-electric propulsion using batteries or fuel cells, resulting in up to 90% lower emissions while remaining fully compliant. A research team of experienced academics, researchers, engineers and technical and professional staff will be spending the next three years working alongside the principal investigators for the projects – Bozhko, Tao Yang and Pat Wheeler – and industry partners to bring the projects to fruition. HECATE and NEWBORN will also benefit from a six-figure contribution from the University of Nottingham Italy – an independent research venture based in the Campania region.