A “unique” enterprise development programme is set to be a boost for small recycling businesses, while also creating jobs and improving the long-term sustainability of the recycling value chain in South Africa. This is according to producer responsibility organisation PETCO, which is implementing the programme. The programme, which focuses on recycling buyback centres, will provide structured training and mentorship as well as infrastructural, equipment and funding support to enable entrepreneurs to grow their post-consumer waste collection volumes and run their businesses more effectively. PETCO CEO Cheri Scholtz says the initial programme is being introduced in KwaZulu-Natal early this year, with a view to rolling it out across South Africa as more funding partners come on board. “PETCO is very serious about creating a sustainable recycling value chain, with a plan which looks ahead as far as five years,” she notes. She says the newly launched enterprise development programme will make a positive contribution towards the transformation of the waste collection and recycling sector and the inclusion of small to medium-sized enterprises (SME) in the waste value chain. “The small business cannot be seen in isolation. It is essential to ensuring a reliable supply of quality feedstock to our recycling partners and must be supported as a key element of our overarching socioeconomic and environmental strategy,” explains Scholtz. Implementing partner Enterprise Room operations manager Sue Jurgens says nine businesses that met the prequalifying criterion of producing at least 20 t a month of polyethylene terephthalate were selected following a rigorous application and assessment process. “The business assessment reviews the SME’s level of business regulatory compliance and the full spectrum of business activities in the creation of its product and service – from receiving materials through to delivery to market, and everything in between. “Then we focus on supporting and guiding the business development process, which covers financial management, marketing, operational efficiencies, cost-effectiveness, staff management, identifying opportunities for new business, and plans for job creation as well as maintaining regulatory compliance,” explains Jurgens. She says the consolidation of all these elements creates opportunities for the small business to continue its growth and obtain future funding to expand further – even after the programme ends. “Systemic change takes time, which is why PETCO’s overall strategy is realistic. There is a tendency in South Africa for corporates to put businesses on programmes in the hope of achieving results very quickly. The businesses we work with will experience change within the programme but must remain sustainable thereafter. Long-term vision and support to drive strategic and behavioural change is required.” Jurgens says expressions of interest from potential funding partners in other provinces would be welcomed and that such investment support would also earn the funder broad-based black economic empowerment scorecard points on their economic development spend. “We have already had some exciting communications from organisations wanting to participate,” she informs.