Airbus, the Europe-based global major aerospace and defence group, reported on Thursday that its near-term greenhouse-gas (GHG) emission reduction targets had been approved by the Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi). The SBTi was created in 2015 to help companies to set emissions reduction targets that could be independently and properly measured, reported and verified. Last year Airbus committed itself to defining science-based reduction targets for all of its GHG emissions. It submitted its near-term targets to the SBTi for assessment and validation. Industrial emissions were divided into three categories, called “scopes”. Scope 1 emissions were those directly generated by a company in its operating processes. Scope 2 emissions were those generated in the production of the energy used by the company. Scope 3 emissions were those produced by the company’s customers through their use of its products. Airbus’ near-term targets were to cut its Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions by 2030. It had also committed itself to reducing the intensity of the GHG emissions produced by the airliners it makes (which would be Scope 3 emissions) by up to 63% by 2035. The baseline for all these targets was 2015. They were in alignment with the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement. “At Airbus we are committed to leading the decarbonisation of the aerospace sector,” affirmed group CEO Guillaume Faury. “The independent assessment and validation of SBTi demonstrates our willingness to define meaningful climate targets aligned with science. Together with our partners and customers, we are determined to achieve these targets and invest in the solutions that will help decarbonise our industry and ensure aviation can continue to play its precious role in society.” The SBTi is a partnership between the international non-profit organisation CDP, the United Nations Global Compact, global non-profit research organisation the World Resources Institute, and the World Wide Fund for Nature (better known as the WWF). More than 4 000 companies have so far joined the SBTi.