President Cyril Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address has reinforced the need for solar to play a leading role in combating South Africa’s enduring electricity crisis, industry organisation the South African Photovoltaic Industry Association (SAPVIA) asserts. The organisation has welcomed the news that government will further support the rollout of rooftop solar projects. “We are pleased to note that government support for solar projects will be matched with tangible assistance for households, as well as tax incentives for businesses. This will certainly help [encourage] businesses and households to invest in rooftop solar and address the loadshedding crisis. “We will await details of the National Treasury’s adjustments to the bounce-back loan scheme to help small businesses invest in solar equipment, and to allow banks and development finance institutions to borrow directly from the scheme to facilitate the leasing of solar panels to their customers. This will support our members to maximise these changes,” says SAPVIA CEO Dr Rethabile Melamu. Noting the announcement of a State of Disaster, Melamu has urged government to seek counsel from the renewables community. “We have learned from the Covid-19 pandemic that navigating a path through a crisis relies on government working closely with experts in the field. Thus, we would urge that relevant Ministries and government bodies engage directly with representatives and specialists from across the renewable energy sector to ensure the appropriate measures are implemented to address the energy crisis. “Clarity is also required on the full powers of the Minister of Electricity and how government will seek to accelerate electricity projects and limit regulatory requirements, while maintaining rigorous environmental protections, procurement principles and technical standards,” Melamu comments. “Solar photovoltaic will play a leading role in overcoming the extraordinary circumstances we find ourselves in and SAPVIA stands ready to support this,” Melamu adds.