Ahead of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s yearly State of the Nation Address (SoNA) on February 9, Organisation Against Tax Abuse (Outa) CEO Wayne Duvenage has warned that empty promises will only deepen the distrust South Africans have towards the government. “The Edelman Trust barometer has, for many years, indicated that South Africans have one of the lowest rates of trust in its government, with distrust as the default position. If [Ramaphosa] continues to make empty promises, he will continue to widen this gap. We need believable implementation of the many plans that are promised. We need impact,” he said. Duvenhage said Ramaphosa would be addressing a nation that has been demoralised by loadshedding; frightening levels of unemployment, poverty and crime; the collapse of water and sewerage infrastructure and rail systems; and by politicians who focus on infighting and personal power to the exclusion of delivering services. “Now that Ramaphosa has cemented his role as the ruling party president for another five-year term, the time is overdue for the nation to see the results of the previous promises, rather than adding to the list with more empty promises,” Duvenhage said on February 8. Outa expects Ramaphosa to address the ongoing crisis surrounding State-owned utility Eskom, including a funded plan to end loadshedding that does not include overpriced projects – such as the Karpowership scheme – and a clear direction on resolving Eskom’s debt burden and the advancement of Eskom’s unbundling. Outa also expects Ramaphosa to show significant support to strengthen the criminal justice system and institutions that were hollowed out by State capture, and to take action to implement the recommendations of the State Capture Commission to combat corruption and organised crime syndicates. Outa also called for a reshuffling of Cabinet, with the removal of “obstructionist incompetence” and the appointment of competent leaders who place South Africa’s interests ahead of their own. The hope is that Ramaphosa’s address will also speak to significantly enhanced protection and support for whistle-blowers, as well as focused and realistic help for businesses and individuals left floundering by the stagnant economy and the collapse of Eskom and State services. Last year, Ramaphosa said South Africa was at a turning point and spoke of a need for a new consensus to drive collective effort by South Africans to address poverty, unemployment and inequality. Outa says this was not followed up with meaningful engagement with citizens and civil society organisations. “We don’t want to see superficial mass mobilisation only next year in attempts to garner votes before the 2024 elections,” Outa said. Despite South Africa’s electricity constraints, Ramaphosa has repeatedly promised in all his past SoNAs a revival of economic growth and job creation. However, little has actually transpired, while talk of having third-party access to improve service delivery on the rail system has not made any meaningful progress. “We don’t need to hear of additional support for corruption fighting. We need to see action and the elimination of construction mafias and the rampant organised crime in government procurement. “South Africans feel less safe today than they did several years ago, and unless we see significant action and a change of leadership, we will never see the police become the service-oriented professional entity that it ought to be,” Outa said.